What are your best practices?
Your favorites?
The best and worst,
even for playwrights, I guess.
Mine is to have coffee
with the director first.
- Talk about things first
- Even before anything?
After your reading.
After the director
reads the script as it is,
there'll be a lot of questions there.
It's also better if the director’s
also a writer or a storyteller.
She might notice
a lot of gaps in the script.
Loopholes and so on.
She'll ask you and you'll realize
you made a mistake or something.
At least you can fix it already.
And you start to get
into a working relationship
with your director.
- Then you'll see the power--
- Power relations.
Even if she's a well-acclaimed
or well-renowned director,
she'll still ask and really seek
what you’re trying to say in your script.
- You know that you’re going to trust her.
- She's willing.
I think it's also important
to know the director's works.
My experience mostly
came from Virgin Labfest.
If this is the type of
material you wrote,
you probably had a director in mind
who will direct it.
When JK became
the director for "Symposium"
and my co-writer and I
wrote a play, “Bago Ilibing”,
we knew it was for JK to direct.
So you already know
who you can work with
for that material.
It's important to know the director
before you meet
each other.
Or if you're not familiar,
you have to get to know the director.
My Virgin Labfest experience
was with Ed Lacson.
We leveled it off.
I was always curious
about his reading of the script.
When we're on the same page
or he gives something new, I give it a go.
At the same time,
when working with actors,
I remember Tita Sherry
when we were rehearsing "Beta".
She was doing something and
I knew the words were lacking.
She was offering something
that deepened the text
but my words were lacking.
So when actors inspire me
to work on my material--
maybe if it's another actor,
there'll be another version.
But when the actor can offer something
that adds to the story,
not necessarily text.
That's a beautiful adjustment.
In terms of PETA, the idea is,
from day one you're already encouraged
in terms of what ideas to talk about.
From day one,
from pre-draft one,
it's already clear.
Your collaborators also encourage you
to do something that excites you.
That's the difference
when you have a text
or if you're going to get
commissioned.
What excites you,
at the same time, what’s the content.
This is in the top of my head.
I had this experience in a production
where all we did was read.
- Reading? As in reading?
- As in reading.
We're used to “Oh first week reading--”
- Then blocking and so on.
Hala, when you look
at the schedule it's all reading.
Maybe it's stage reading?
Other actors who were big stars
were getting antsy by the end of the first week
And I'm just, "Oh relax, we're gonna be
reading for a month.”
That was pretty new for me
so I just accepted it.
We're reading it in a certain way
and thought this was the right way to read it.
On the second week, I'm already bored.
Bored at my way of reading.
Oh my god,
"Three Sisters"...?
No
No. I don't want to say.
I mean, I was bored
with my way of reading.
When I got bored,
I started figuring things out.
I started remembering
the super basic training
we had as actors
to pay attention to punctuations.
There’s a reason for the comma,
the period, the ellipsis, and so on.
So I looked.
And it was better.
I found a new way of reading it
so I was excited again for the third reading.
Come third week,
we were still reading.
I'm serious.
Come third week,
I felt like I didn't know
anything anymore.
Like I was back to zero.
What I thought I knew on the first week
and what I thought I discovered on the second week,
I wasn't so sure of anymore
on the third week.
But strangely,
when Sir Nonon (director) started blocking us,
I felt like I knew
exactly what to do.
Something like that because
we already saw so many things while reading.
After sitting for so long,
we just wanted to act it out.
His flow was similar for "Tempest",
the process was the same.
You already worked it all out.
So once you stand up,
everybody’s bodies just moves
because the text becomes part of you.
- Yes, exactly.
- It's another process.
It’s a wonderful way
to work if we only had that much time.
Was the playwright there
at the reading the whole time?
No.
But they were
always in discussion.
I think that was
one of the best experiences,
just working with text.
We didn’t even discuss anything,
we just read.
We would just read,
and read, and read.
Until Lex, Sir Jack, and I
reached this point
and that's where
we were shaking it off and asking,
"What are we reading?"
"What did you feel?"
Even if we weren't told to discuss it,
we just came together
wanting to do it that way.
I really liked that process,
but it didn't happen again
since we're time constrained.
How about the others?
Best or worst?
Just choose one.
Learning points.
- Learning points?
Yeah.
Mine's probably "Battalia (Royale)".
At the time,
I was new to Manila,
fresh from high school.
A year.
DUP (Dulaang UP),
I'm from DUP.
I first worked with--
actually it was my second time
working with JK after "Symposium".
He invited me to "Battalia".
It was all new to me
because I had to devise
my own character in the play
and translate the text
he gave in my own words.
I just felt alive.
I just felt validated as an actor.
When you're in DUP,
you're still a student taking directions,
"Go there, go there, okay.”
“Oh, face front.”
I felt validated as an actor,
my voice actually mattered.
When we played it out,
there was this magical moment
where everyone was in sync.
We weren't supposed
to improvise a scene
but when we met in the scene,
it was so fun!
I felt really alive as an actor.
That everything I do is valid.
Actually, it’s still
my favorite play until now.